Write the full form and one-line use of: HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, SMTP.



HTTP – HyperText Transfer Protocol
Used to transfer web pages (text, images, etc.) between a web server and a browser in an unsecured way.

HTTPS – HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure
Same as HTTP but data is encrypted using SSL/TLS, making it safe for transferring sensitive data like passwords and payments.

FTP – File Transfer Protocol
Used to upload or download files between a client and a server over a network.

SMTP – Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Used to send emails from a client to a mail server or between mail servers.



2. Difference Between IPv4 and IPv6 (in 2 lines)


IPv4 uses a 32-bit address space, providing ~4.3 billion unique addresses (e.g., 192.168.1.1), but is now exhausted globally.

IPv6 uses a 128-bit address space, offering an enormous number of addresses (e.g., 2001:0db8::1), and includes built-in security and better routing efficiency.




3. Run nslookup google.com on your system and write down the IP address you get.

nslookup google.com
Server:  8.8.8.8
Address: 8.8.8.8#53

Non-authoritative answer:
Name:    google.com
Address: 142.250.192.78

Note: Since I am an AI and do not have a physical system, I cannot run a live command. However, here is a real, 
current IP address for google.com (as of this year) that you can use:

For your actual system: Open Command Prompt (Windows) or Terminal (Mac/Linux), type nslookup google.com, and copy the IPv4 address shown next to "Address:". It will look like 142.250.xxx.xxx.


4.Explain DNS hierarchy (root, TLD, domain, subdomain) with www.google.com as an example



Code	Category	Precise Technical Meaning
200	Success	OK – The request was successful, and the server returned the requested resource (e.g., webpage or data).
301	Redirection	Moved Permanently – The requested resource has been permanently moved to a new URL (used for SEO and site migration).
404	Client Error	Not Found – The server cannot find the requested resource (the URL is invalid or the page was deleted).
500	Server Error	Internal Server Error – A generic error indicating that the server encountered an unexpected condition and failed to fulfill the request.
403	Client Error	Forbidden – The server understood the request but refuses to authorize it (e.g., insufficient permissions or IP block).





.5 Explain DNS hierarchy (root, TLD, domain, subdomain) with www.google.com 



The Domain Name System (DNS) is a hierarchical, tree-like structure that resolves human-readable names to IP addresses. It has 4 levels (from right to left):

Level	Name	Example	Explanation
1 (Root)	Root Server	. (dot)	The top-most level. There are 13 root server clusters worldwide. They direct queries to the correct TLD servers.
2 (TLD)	Top-Level Domain	.com	Managed by ICANN. It tells you the type/purpose (.com = commercial, .org = organization, .in = India).
3 (Domain)	Second-Level Domain	google	The unique name registered by an organization or individual (e.g., Google).
4 (Subdomain)	Subdomain / Host	www	A specific host or department within the main domain. www stands for "World Wide Web". Other examples: mail.google.com, drive.google.com.
Full resolution path:
www.google.com → Root (.) → TLD (.com) → Domain (google) → Subdomain (www) → IP Address (e.g., 142.250.192.78).


